Initial issue #12 commit (#46)
canonical/open-documentation-academy: landscape/how-to/install-landscape-server-on-microsoft-azure.md

# How to install Landscape Server on Microsoft Azure

This guide provides an example of how to install and set up your Landscape server on Microsoft Azure with [cloud-init](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). The instructions here can be used for standard or FIPS-compliant deployments.

> **For the most up-to-date documentation on Microsoft Azure, see [Microsoft's Azure documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure).

**Contents:**

- Install and set up Microsoft Azure CLI

> - Provision Azure resources and deploy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Provision Azure resources
```

Reviewer: Since the deploying step is in the next section

- Deploy Landscape Server VM with cloud-init
- Configure Landscape
- (Optional) Perform a complete teardown

## Install and set up Microsoft Azure CLI

### Install `Azure CLI`

To install `Azure CLI`, refer to the [Install Azure CLI on Ubuntu](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/azure/en/latest/azure-how-to/instances/install-azure-cli/) guide.

### Connect `Azure` with your Microsoft Azure account

The Azure CLI's default authentication method for logins uses a web browser and access token to sign in. To login, run:
```
az login
```

If the Azure CLI can open your default browser, it will open the default browser and load an Azure sign-in page for you to sign in with your Azure account. Otherwise, it will instruct you to open a browser page and enter the code displayed in your terminal.

Sign in with your account credentials in the browser. For more information on signing in with the Azure CLI, see [Microsoft's documentation on signing in interactively with the Azure CLI](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/authenticate-azure-cli-interactively).

> ## Provision Azure resources and deploy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Provision Azure resources
```

Once you’ve chosen your configuration template, complete the following steps.

1. Set the `IMAGE_FAMILY` environment variable based on the cloud-init configuration you chose.

- If you’re using `cloud-init-quickstart.yaml`, run:
```
curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/canonical/landscape-scripts/main/provisioning/cloud-init-quickstart.yaml -o cloud-init.yaml
IMAGE_FAMILY=Canonical:0001-com-ubuntu-pro-jammy:pro-22_04-lts-gen2:latest
```

 - If you’re using `cloud-init-quickstart-fips.yaml`, run:
```
curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/canonical/landscape-scripts/main/provisioning/cloud-init-quickstart-fips.yaml -o cloud-init.yaml
IMAGE_FAMILY=Canonical:0001-com-ubuntu-pro-focal-fips:pro-fips-20_04-gen2:latest
```

2. Open the downloaded cloud-init YAML file in an editor, determine which configuration parameters need to be changed between lines 4 and 32 and change these parameters.

The `HOSTNAME` on line 16 and `DOMAIN` on line 19 must be changed. Updating `EMAIL` on line 9, and adding your SendGrid API key on line 29 as the `SMTP_PASSWORD` are optional, but strongly recommended.

### Create VM

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Note: Microsoft recommends not storing sensitive data in the `--custom-data` field. For more information, see [Microsoft's documentation on custom data and cloud-init for virtual machines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/custom-data).

```

Reviewer: If you have any additional thoughts on how this information could be noted to the user, feel free to provide other suggestions. :) I just want to make sure the user isn't accidentally exposing sensitive data without realizing.

# How to install Landscape Server on Microsoft Azure

> This guide provides an example of how to install and set up your Landscape server on Microsoft Azure with [cloud-init](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). The instructions here can be used for both FIPS-hardened or non-hardened systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide provides an example of how to install and set up your Landscape server on Microsoft Azure with [cloud-init](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
```
```suggestion
This guide provides an example of how to install and set up your Landscape server on Microsoft Azure with [cloud-init](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). The instructions here can be used for standard or FIPS-compliant deployments.
```

Reviewer: (You can ignore the first suggestion of deleting the last sentence.. not sure why it's there... :sweat_smile:)

> > **For the most up-to-date documentation on Microsoft Azure, see [Microsoft Azure documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **For the most up-to-date documentation on Microsoft Azure, see [Microsoft's Azure documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure).
```

**Contents:**

- Install and set up Microsoft Azure CLI
- Provision Azure resources and deploy
- Deploy Landscape Server VM with cloud-init
- Configure Landscape
- (Optional) Perform a complete teardown

## Install and set up Microsoft Azure CLI

### Install `Azure CLI`

To install `Azure CLI`, refer to the [Install Azure CLI on Ubuntu](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/azure/en/latest/azure-how-to/instances/install-azure-cli/) guide.

### Connect `Azure` with your Microsoft Azure account

> The Azure CLI's default authentication method for logins uses a web browser and access token to sign in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Azure CLI's default authentication method for logins uses a web browser and access token to sign in. To login, run:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Run the `az login` command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```
az login
```

> If the Azure CLI can open your default browser, it initiates authorisation code flow and opens the default browser to load an Azure sign-in page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the Azure CLI can open your default browser, it will open the default browser and load an Azure sign-in page for you to sign in with your Azure account. Otherwise, it will instruct you to open a browser page and enter the code displayed in your terminal.
```

Reviewer: Just wanted to provide some additional information here.

> Sign in with your account credentials in the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sign in with your account credentials in the browser. For more information on signing in with the Azure CLI, see [Microsoft's documentation on signing in interactively with the Azure CLI](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/authenticate-azure-cli-interactively).
```

## Provision Azure resources and deploy

### Create a resource group

Create a resource group to contain all the Azure resources for deploying the VM.  The following command creates a resource group named `Landscape-rg` in the `eastus` location:
```
az group create --name Landscape-rg --location eastus
```

Output will be displayed in JSON format:
```
{
  "id": "/subscriptions/xxxxxxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxxxxxxxxxx/resourceGroups/Landscape-rg",
  "location": "eastus",
  "managedBy": null,
  "name": "Landscape-rg",
  "properties": {
    "provisioningState": "Succeeded"
  },
  "tags": null,
  "type": "Microsoft.Resources/resourceGroups"
}
```

### Create public-ip address resource

> Create static IP address in the `Landscape-rg` resource group:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a static IP address in the `Landscape-rg` resource group:
```

```
az network public-ip create \
	--resource-group Landscape-rg \
    --name LandscapePublicIP \
    --location eastus \
    --allocation-method Static
```

> Output will be displayed in JSON format and will show static IP address (extract below):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Output will be displayed in JSON format and will show a static IP address:
```

```

> "ipAddress": "34.139.255.120",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"ipAddress": "34.XXX.XXX.XXX",
```

"ipTags": [],
"location": "eastus",
"name": "LandscapePublicIP",
"provisioningState": "Succeeded",
"publicIPAddressVersion": "IPv4",
"publicIPAllocationMethod": "Static",
"resourceGroup": "Landscape-rg",
```

Copy the IP address and set it as the A record value for the domain or subdomain that will serve as the FQDN. You set the A record in your DNS service. You can also use Azure DNS zone to host your DNS domain and manage your DNS records.

Verify the A record using `nslookup`. Replace `{landscape.domain.com}` with your FQDN:

```
nslookup {landscape.domain.com}
```

You’ll receive output similar to:
```

> Server:		127.0.0.53

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Server:		127.X.X.XX
```

Author: I have left the output from the nslookup command for the dns server and address.  As this is what most users output will be if using Ubuntu, as it points to the loopback address of 127.0.0.53 which systemd-resolved uses.

> Address:	127.0.0.53#53

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Address:	127.X.X.XX#XX
```

Author: Refer to reply in above conversation.

   
Non-authoritative answer:
Name:	landscape.domain.com

> Address: 34.139.255.120

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Address: 34.XXX.XXX.XXX
```

```

If the address value in the `nslookup` output matches the value of the `LandscapePublicIP` static IP address, the LetsEncrypt SSL provisioning step defined in the cloud-init configuration automation template will succeed.

## Deploy Landscape Server VM with cloud-init

Before beginning the deployment process with cloud-init, you must choose which of the two cloud-init configuration automation templates you want to use. In the [Landscape Scripts](https://github.com/canonical/landscape-scripts) Github repository, there are two Landscape Quickstart cloud-init configuration templates: [`cloud-init-quickstart.yaml`](https://github.com/canonical/landscape-scripts/blob/main/provisioning/cloud-init-quickstart.yaml) and [`cloud-init-quickstart-fips.yaml`](https://github.com/canonical/landscape-scripts/blob/main/provisioning/cloud-init-quickstart-fips.yaml).

> The `cloud-init-quickstart.yaml` template is designed for anyone, and the `cloud-init-quickstart-fips.yaml` is designed for FIPS compliant deployments of Landscape Server. For more information, see [how to install FIPS hardened Landscape Server](https://ubuntu.com/landscape/docs/install-fips-hardened-landscape-server).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `cloud-init-quickstart.yaml` template is designed for anyone, and the `cloud-init-quickstart-fips.yaml` is designed for FIPS compliant deployments of Landscape Server. For more information, see [how to install FIPS-compliant Landscape Server](https://ubuntu.com/landscape/docs/install-fips-hardened-landscape-server).
```

```

2. Open the downloaded cloud-init YAML file in an editor, determine which configuration parameters need to be changed between lines 4 and 32 and change these parameters.

The `HOSTNAME` on line 16 and `DOMAIN` on line 19 must be changed. Updating `EMAIL` on line 9, and adding your SendGrid API key on line 29 as the `SMTP_PASSWORD` are optional, but strongly recommended.

### Create VM

Run the following commands to create a VM and add a security rule to the network security group (NSG) to open port 80 and 443.  These ports are required to be open to allow the LetsEncrypt SSL provisioning step defined in the cloud-init to succeed.  The `--generate-ssh-keys` parameter causes the CLI to look for an available ssh key in `~/.ssh`. If one is found, that key is used. If not, one is generated and stored in `~/.ssh`.  The `--custom-data` parameter to pass in the cloud-init config file. Provide the full path to the `cloud-init.yaml` config if you saved the file outside of your present working directory:
```
az vm create \
    --resource-group Landscape-rg \
    --name LandscapeVM \
    --image $IMAGE_FAMILY \
    --size Standard_D2s_v3 \
    --admin-username azureuser \

>     --assign-identity \

Reviewer: Can the `--assign-identity` parameter just be removed?

    --generate-ssh-keys \
    --public-ip-address LandscapePublicIP \
    --custom-data cloud-init.yaml
az vm open-port \
	--resource-group Landscape-rg \
	--name LandscapeVM \
	--port 80,443 \
	--priority 100
```

> It takes a few minutes to create the VM and supporting resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It usually takes a few minutes to create the VM and supporting resources.
```

> [!NOTE]

> When creating the VM an error may occur with the code `MarketplacePurchaseEligibilityFailed`. This error indicates that before the subscription can use this image, you need to accept the legal terms of the image. Viewing and accepting the terms can be done via the Azure CLI. Refer to Microsoft Azure documentation [az vm image terms](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/vm/image/terms).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating the VM, an error may occur with the code `MarketplacePurchaseEligibilityFailed`. This error indicates that before the subscription can use this image, you need to accept the legal terms of the image. You can view and accept the terms via the Azure CLI. Refer to [Microsoft's documentation on image terms](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/vm/image/terms).
```

Observe the process by tailing the `cloud-init-output.log` file. Replace `{landscape.domain.com}` with your FQDN or static IP address:
```
ssh azureuser@{landscape.domain.com} 'tail -f /var/log/cloud-init-output.log'
```

> A reboot may be required during the cloud-init process. If a reboot is required, you’ll receive the following output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A reboot may be required during the cloud-init process. If a reboot is required, you’ll receive output similar to:
```

```
2023-08-20 17:30:04,721 - cc_package_update_upgrade_install.py[WARNING]: Rebooting after upgrade or install per /var/run/reboot-required
```

If the `IMAGE_FAMILY` specified earlier contained all the security patches, this reboot step may not occur.

Repeat the following code if a reboot was necessary to continue observing the log file:
```
ssh azureuser@{landscape.domain.com} 'tail -f /var/log/cloud-init-output.log'
```

> Wait until the cloud-init process is complete. When it’s complete, you’ll receive the following line similar to this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wait until the cloud-init process is complete. When it’s complete, you’ll receive output similar to:
```

```
cloud-init v. 23.2.2-0ubuntu0~22.04.1 finished at Sun, 20 Aug 2023 17:30:56 +0000. Datasource DataSourceAzure [seed=/dev/sr0].  Up 37.35 seconds
```

Press `CTRL + C` to terminate the tail process in your terminal window.

## Configure Landscape

> 1. Navigate to the Landscape dashboard by entering the FQDN of the Landscape VM into a browser window

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the Landscape web portal by entering the FQDN of the Landscape VM into a browser window
```

Reviewer: We've changed to refer to it as the "web portal" now :smiley:

# How to install Landscape Server on Microsoft Azure

This guide provides an example of how to install and set up your Landscape server on Microsoft Azure with [cloud-init](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). The instructions here can be used for both FIPS-hardened or non-hardened systems.

> **For the most up-to-date documentation on Microsoft Azure, see [Microsoft Azure documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure).

**Contents:**

- Install and set up Microsoft Azure CLI
- Provision Azure resources and deploy
- Deploy Landscape Server VM with cloud-init
- Configure Landscape
- (Optional) Perform a complete teardown

## Install and set up Microsoft Azure CLI

### Install `Azure CLI`

> 

Reviewer: Changed, see comment below

The `cloud-init-quickstart.yaml` template is designed for anyone, and the `cloud-init-quickstart-fips.yaml` is designed for FIPS compliant deployments of Landscape Server. For more information, see [how to install FIPS hardened Landscape Server](https://ubuntu.com/landscape/docs/install-fips-hardened-landscape-server).

Once you’ve chosen your configuration template, complete the following steps.

1. Set the `IMAGE_FAMILY` environment variable based on the cloud-init configuration you chose.

- If you’re using `cloud-init-quickstart.yaml`, run:
```
curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/canonical/landscape-scripts/main/provisioning/cloud-init-quickstart.yaml -o cloud-init.yaml

> IMAGE_FAMILY=Canonical:0001-com-ubuntu-server-jammy:22_04-lts-gen2:latest

Reviewer 2: I think this should point to Canonical:0001-com-ubuntu-pro-jammy:pro-22_04-lts-gen2:latest to be equivalent to the https://ubuntu.com/landscape/docs/install-on-google-cloud it is based on.
See https://documentation.ubuntu.com/azure/en/latest/azure-how-to/instances/find-ubuntu-images/

Reviewer: Changed, see comment below

```

 - If you’re using `cloud-init-quickstart-fips.yaml`, run:
```
curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/canonical/landscape-scripts/main/provisioning/cloud-init-quickstart-fips.yaml -o cloud-init.yaml
IMAGE_FAMILY=Canonical:0001-com-ubuntu-server-focal:20_04-lts-gen2:latest

> ```

Reviewer: Changed, see comment below
